
## Introduction

Glaucon wanted Socrates to show not only that justice was good in itself, but also that being just was always preferable to being unjust. He asked Socrates to identify that power justice had on the soul itself. So, Socrates needs to show that the just soul is the happiest of all possible souls. He does this in Book 8 by contrasting justice with every form of injustice, both in the person and in the city. His goal is to show that each type of injustice will generate less happiness than justice. 

Socrates identifies the four main species of injustice (see 445c) with already existing forms of government: timocracy, oligarchy, democracy, tyranny. A psychological constitution corresponds to each form, so that we may speak of the oligarchic soul as naturally as of the oligarchic city (544a, d–e).

Types of city and souls

1.  The aristocratic person, ruled by his rational part, is concerned with what is best for each part of the soul in relation to the whole.
1.	The timocratic (538-9) man, ruled by his spirited part, is concerned with honor and victory.2.	The oligarchic man is a lover of money above everything else (553ff); he is concerned with being able to satisfy his necessary appetites.  3.	The democratic man (559-61) is ruled by unnecessary appetites.4.	The tyrannical man (556-576) is enslaved to appetites. He constantly feels the need to satisfy this desire and never manages to fill it fully.  He has no friends and no security. 

**General strategy:**

Plato argues that any value other than justice will cause the soul and city to degenerate into an even worse state. Plato assumes the following: 

1. Most constitutions pursues a particular goal: to coordinate the city's action around some one value. That value can be honor or money, pleasure in general or sexual pleasure in particular. The leaders agree that they need to unify their people around some goal, but they disagree about the goal. 
2. Only the just city pursues an ideal that produces and enhances coordination. Every ideal other than justice engenders instability in the city that honors that ideal. This instability then resolves itself into a worse constitution.
3. If every configuration of the city aside from the best one grants pride of place to the very value that will degrade the city further, there is something inherently wrong with those configurations.
4. Trouble begins when the wrong children enter the ruling class (546b–547a).




## Degeneration to Timocracy

In Greek, *aristocracy* means rule of the best. In Plato's ideal city, the just city, the philosophers rule, guardians enforce their orders, and the workers are content to be ruled. In the just soul, the rational part rules with a concern for each part of their soul as part of their overall good (586d-587a; cf. 442c). Plato illustrates this claim by appealing to an image of the soul as consisting of a man, a lion, and a many-headed beast (588c-590d). It is fitting for the man to look after the beast, with the help of the lion; only in this way does the beast get what's best for it (589ab). The point of the illustration is to emphasize that the rational part alone has a comprehensive and impartial concern for the whole soul, including each of its parts. The rational part does not deny the appetitive and spirited parts but trains them and satisfies them as is appropriate for them as parts of an ordered whole (591c-592a). The overall goal is to ensure that they can be satisfied while preserving psychic harmony. 

Consider the health analogy: in caring for my whole body, I am concerned with the health and functioning of my bodily parts as parts of a larger, functioning whole. I will not eat as much as I can, but as much as contributes to optimal functioning of someone with my frame and build. Caring for my right arm will not consist in making it as strong as possible but in strengthening it in proportion to the rest of my body. Similarly, in pursuing the good of the whole soul, one will gratify diverse appetites and passions insofar as their gratification contributes to a well functioning tripartite soul in which reason rules.



Timocracy, both in cities and souls, arise when the rational part loses its power over the whole (547b, 550a–b). 

This happens when the eugenic program fails. 

The productive class in the city, and the appetites in the soul, insist on their claims to satisfaction. In a compromise between lowest and highest, the spirited part between them comes to rule.

Sparta, the second-best type of government (544c). Although this form of life enjoys considerable stability, the fact that the spirited part comes to power in the midst of conflict shows that the timocracy will possess less unity than we found in the best soul and city.

+ In the soul the desire for honor takes charge, for out of all the bodily desires it is the one that most resembles an organizational force. Unlike lust and hunger, greed knows the value of discipline (however anxious: 554d) and long-term planning (however ignobly aimed: 554e–555a).

## Degeneration to Oligarchy

+ The competitive spirit of the timocracy’s citizens prompts them to accumulate private wealth (550e) and turns them into oligarchs (551a). 
+ The productive class takes charge, money becomes the dominant force in a society; thus it will be not all members of the producing class who rule, only the richest (551b). 
+ In the soul the desire for money takes charge, for out of all the bodily desires it is the one that most resembles an organizational force. Unlike lust and hunger, greed knows the value of discipline (however anxious: 554d) and long-term planning (however ignobly aimed: 554e–555a).





First, Plato fits his account of social decay into his claim that justice requires the performance of natural functions.  Species of political vice are identified by the class that inappropriately rules the city. The worst social pathology – people who live off liquidated assets (552a, 564b) – is the one that most flamboyantly breaks the rule of distributed labor.

Secondly, bad constitutions possess only spurious signs of unity. The oligarchic soul controls itself as if virtuous, but it lacks the harmony that characterizes true virtue. A single appetite dominates the oligarchic soul, but that appetite can’t unify it. Unlike reason, which inspects every motivation, then chooses which ones to permit, avarice rules by insisting on its own goals. Avarice knows no way of reining itself in: not having been born to rule, it lacks the capacity for self-examination. Plato would cite billionaires who crave money beyond anything they could spend, as proof of the unfitness of greed to rule the soul.


## Degeneration to Democracy

When the oligarchy carries its avar- icious ideal too far, it impoverishes its solid citizens (555d–e) and so encourages the licentiousness that characterizes democracy (555c, 556c–e). 

Democracy carries disunity to its logical extreme. Democracy presupposes disagreement, not as a temporary evil to be overcome in future unanimity, but as an inherent condition of society. No value predominates in the democratic city, unless it is the open, empty value of toleration (557b, 558a). Because the citizens can agree only to disagree, they appeal to no common value and encourage no public virtue. Their pact of mutual toleration is like a code they all adhere to, and playing by the rules is the closest thing to moral principle they know. But the very idea of harmony, or of a ruler superior to the citizens, has become repugnant to them.
Equally egalitarian, the individual democratic soul prefers not to choose among its desires – certainly not to condemn any objects of desire (561b) – but indulges each one as it arises. Desires may be necessary or unnecessary (558d–559c); and whereas the oligarchic soul also denied itself higher impulses in the service of desire, at least that desire originated in need. Having lost the power to tell necessary from unnecessary desires, the democratic soul has no principle to guide its steps, not even the crass and unlovely rule of greed.

INJUSTICE IN THE SOUL AND IN THE CITY (BOOKS 8–9) 191
There is still worse ahead, for Socrates has tyranny to speak of. The greatest dictatorship in the city arises out of the greatest anarchy (564a). In the soul, the democratic person’s refusal to judge among desires brings one of those desires, lust (erôs), to outgrow all the rest (572e–573a). (Here Socrates seems to despise erôs. Elsewhere he recognizes its importance: 458d, 474d–475b. In the Symposium and Phaedrus Plato finds metaphysical significance in sexual love; the Timaeus lists the bad effects of celibacy at 91b–c; cf. Laws 930c.)
In one sense this development returns us to the oligarchic soul, for like it the tyrannic soul follows the command of a single desire. We see Plato working to make his psychological theory account for the phenomena: he draws yet another distinction among desires, this time separating unnecessary ones into the law-abiding and the lawless (571b). The worst of the lawless desires is lust, especially monstrous lust for forbidden persons, foods, and deeds (574e–575a). Unlike the oligarch’s greed, this transgressive lewdness has nothing to do with self-control. It rules the soul wildly – indeed, it emerges as the dominant commit- ment of the tyrannical soul not by virtue of any deliberation on the person’s part but faute de mieux, because it has out-shouted every other desire. It comes to dominate by being the most uncontrollable desire and not because it is suited to controlling; thus its rule is of all states the least recognizable as rule.
Of all the psychological portraits, this one (reminiscent of the elderly Baron de Charlus in Proust) sounds the most modern. Unfortunately, the portrait of a depraved soul, for all its realism, strains Plato’s psychological theory. He needs to claim that someone compelled by one desire nevertheless experiences less unity than the person whose soul follows the promptings of many desires. Both the structure of the soul, and its disunity when unjust, have become confused by Plato’s efforts to make every soul fit his theory. In reality, the political and psychological transitions from democracy to tyranny are not obviously symptoms of growing chaos. If anything, they show that chaos engenders a new order. In the case of the soul, Socrates’ repeated distinctions among the various desires brings to mind a question that came up regarding Book 4, whether this category of ‘desire’ had any informative

192 THE ARGUMENT OF THE REPUBLIC
function, or merely gathered under a single meaninglessly broad heading motivations that had nothing to do with each other. If rule by the appetites can equally produce oligarchy, democracy, or tyranny in the soul, the appetites must have even less to do with one another than we thought.
LIMITATIONS OF THE COMPARATIVE METHOD
Book 8 and its conclusion in Book 9 stand out for their psychological insight and their applicability to states and people beyond any that Plato knew. By the time the tyrannical soul has been described (576c) there seems to be little left for the reader to do but agree that Plato has laid out these cities and souls in order from best to worst, and that the good city surpasses its political competitors; the corresponding soul, all its psychological competitors.
But what has depicting this string of injustices accomplished? Grant that each city and soul is more prone than its predecessor to engage in unjust acts. We knew that before looking at the cases, since ex hypothesi each one was to be more unjust, or worse, than its predecessor. If Plato is to answer Thrasymachus, he also needs to show that what makes a soul worse makes it unhappier. In timocracy and oligarchy the power passed ever further from the rational part or class, which is most equipped to rule, to the appetitive, whose selfishness assures that its rule will never bring about the voluntary cooperation of the parts being ruled (552e). If every step into greater injustice could likewise be shown to follow from a further loss of unity, we might have the basis for an argument: harmony in the soul being pleasant, and inner conflict a source of unhappiness, the arrangement that produces good works will simultaneously lead to happiness (8).
But this growing disintegration ends with the tyrant. The parts of the soul then cease to illuminate, since Plato complicates the desiring part beyond recognition. And although we know what Socrates means when he finds ‘anarchy and lawlessness’ in the tyrannical soul (575a), he has not shown that this lawlessness follows from the disunity that Book 4 warned against. Since Socrates’ explicit comparisons of justice with injustice (576b–588a) use tyr- anny to represent all injustice, this deviation from the theme of

INJUSTICE IN THE SOUL AND IN THE CITY (BOOKS 8–9) 193
unity is no small matter: unity of a sort we recognize disappears exactly when we are about to put the picture of disunity to work. Other details also cause trouble. Each city is shown to follow by inevitable historical laws into the next, and each soul is put into a man whose son degenerates into the worse type. To what extent does Plato believe himself to be telling a causal story? The tale of generational decline is too simplistic; since Plato gives no hint of how upward progress might work, we have to assume this devolu- tion to be terminable and irreversible, so that within five generations every human community would consist only of sex-crazed bur- glars. As a factual claim this is false, besides sounding like the
oldest complaint ever made about younger generations. Concerning the city, Plato knew that the transitions he speaks of are not the only ones possible. During his own adulthood Athens recovered from the Thirty Tyrants and returned to democracy. And he was even sixteen, old enough to notice, when the city went briefly from democracy to oligarchy in 411. So governments can grow out of worse forms into better. Moreover, if every city declines from a better one, then the best city, which would improve on every other, can never be born in this world
whose history always travels from bad to worse.
Plato’s ‘history’ makes better sense as a lively vehicle for pre-
senting a hierarchically ordered series of governments. The fiction that each type slides down further from its predecessor permits Plato to look for the single characteristic that sets democracy apart from oligarchy, and oligarchy from timocracy. His argu- ment would work just as well if cities changed haphazardly; to prove that justice benefits a city Plato needs only to show that each type is better than the one below, even if it does not transform itself into that worse type.
Unfortunately, translating the narrative of cultural decline into a taxonomy of governments turns a strong but false claim about politics into a truer but much blander one. We lose any sense that Plato locates the characteristics of various cities in specific material conditions. If this is not really history, we can ignore its accounts of political change.
One question about this aspect of the argument is whether Plato is registering any genuine interest in history. There is evidence

194 THE ARGUMENT OF THE REPUBLIC
that he read the two great Greek historians Herodotus and Thucydides, but Plato’s interpreters today tend not to ask how he might have responded to their works. Is the primordial Athens imagined in the Timaeus and Critias an attempt at a Herodotean dramatization of the Republic? Then maybe Plato thinks some actual full-scale history can be told according to the Republic’s principles of constitutional change.
Even more relevant is the historical narrative that dominates Plato’s Menexenus. Socrates summarizes a century’s worth of Athenian wars and alliances, and three forces shape his story: Athens the truly Greek state, honorable and wise; the other Greek cities, which Socrates calls ‘half-Greek,’ whom Athens sometimes educates in courage; and the grasping tyrannical barbarians. This history runs from best to worst, as the Republic’s history of a city does. The three forces correspond to three parts of the soul along lines suggested in the Republic (435e–436a), and in many instances the transition from one international configuration to a worse one follows the same dynamic as the constitutional changes within the city. If the Menexenus’ speech is not the joke that many scholars suppose it to be, these parallels between its international history and the decline of the city in the Republic show Plato seeking a method for philosophical history. He would have seen the intellectual value of both Herodotus and Thucydides, but neither one had organized history’s events with the system that a philosopher could bring to the subject. It would be worth studying Platonic history more closely to see whether it does approach sound philosophy – whether Plato has in fact united the disciplines.
As for the analogy between the city and the soul, that originally promises to play an important role in Plato’s argument. Glaucon’s introduction expects bad regimes to shed light on bad kinds of people (544a–b). Socrates adds that each regime will be populated primarily by the people whose souls correspond to the form of government (544d–e; see 435a–c). If this is true, the timocratic soul will both share its general structure with the timocratic city, and turn up more frequently than any other personality type in the citizens of that city. Then individual psychology explains a great deal about politics, for a city will reflect the character of its citizens. Such a tight relationship between the city and the private

INJUSTICE IN THE SOUL AND IN THE CITY (BOOKS 8–9) 195
person would retrospectively justify the Republic’s argumentative strategy, by unifying its treatments of souls and cities.
But the analogy breaks down. When Socrates imagines the development of timocratic and oligarchic men, he sets them in cities unlike either their own souls or their fathers’. The timocrat’s father, the best sort of man, lives in a city that is not well run (549c), therefore not the best city that would correspond to his soul. The young oligarch grows up in a city swarming with informers and lawsuits (553b), which is to say in a city more like democracy than oligarchy. The tyrant offers the clearest disanalogy, for exactly by drawing attention to the special misery of a tyr- annical person who gains a tyrant’s power, Socrates is suggesting that this conjunction of pathology and power will be the exception rather than the rule (576b–c). So psychological tyranny does not have to have anything to do with dictatorship. Socrates expects tyrannical men to band together in a city (575a–c); but if they form a small group in any given city, they cannot be that city’s representative types.
Furthermore, using the citizens’ characters to explain the regimes they belong to makes a confusion of the changes that the two entities undergo. Family psychodynamics turn one character type into the worse type, while the city’s degradation is caused by political and economic processes. It would take a strange coin- cidence to make personal histories all across a city transform the son of an oligarchic soul into a democratic type, right when the oligarchy’s changing economy and property holdings bring about democratic institutions. Plato must be saying something more modest, that certain sorts of people resemble certain constitutions. There is something metaphorically democratic about a democratic person’s soul and metaphorically oligarchic about the oligarchic soul. In practice this connection has only one definite consequence: ‘With respect to virtue and happiness ... the relation between man and man [will] be that between city and city’ (576d). The oligarchically souled will be more self-controlled people than those with democratic souls, as oligarchies in cities are more self- controlled, hence more virtuous, than democracies. We rank souls as we rank cities. This helps, but Plato could have shown one kind of soul to be worse than another much more directly than by

constructing such a complex analogy. The analogy between city and soul, like the account of each city’s degradation, fails as a literal statement, and as a metaphorical version of the truth it turns out to be less significant than it had first appeared. The general effect of this discussion is one of vast machinery being assembled and then sitting idle.


Comparison of 4 types of souls in bk VIII and the beginning of IX shows that a unified and harmonious soul is preferable to a disordered soul. i.	Four Souls	Plato thinks that anyone who sees what the tyrant’s life is like will see that it doesn’t pay to be a tyrant; it doesn’t pay to be unjust. 


What troubles him is that even so, the domestication may not work. Sooner or later the rulers will miscalculate the mating times for guardian couples, and the next generation will yield a lesser crop of rulers (546a–547a).



The gratuitously obscure language of this passage, that business of squares of numbers and dates of birth, makes the point sound complicated. In fact Plato finds it depressingly simple. The good city will only exist given human interventions into the natural order to breed natures attuned to society’s needs. Because those interven- tions ultimately fail, some gap will always remain between the natural order (how people behave) and the moral order (how they ought to).


Whereas the desires of the appetitive and spirited parts of the soul reflect practical reasoning from a partial perspective, only the desires of the rational part reflect practical reasoning from an impartial and comprehensive perspective. Because each part of the soul engages in reasoning, it is possible for Plato to think of each of them as if they were agents (cf. 588c-d). In books viii-ix Plato examines the lives of deviant people -- the timocrat, the oligarch, the democrat, and the tyrant -- who correspond to the non- rational parts of the soul, precisely because, in different ways, they are dominated by the non- rational parts.

Only when the rational part rules is a person's conduct regulated by a concern for each part of his soul as part of his overall good (586d-587a; cf. 442c). Plato illustrates this claim by appealing to an image of the soul as consisting of a man, a lion, and a many-headed beast (588c-590d). It is fitting for the man to look after the beast, with the help of the lion; only in this way does the beast get what's best for it (589ab). If Plato literally identifies the rational part with a man, he introduces an apparently vicious regress, because the man himself must have three parts, including a rational part, which itself is a man, which in turn has three parts, etc. But the point of thinking of the rational part as a man having a whole soul is that the rational part alone has a comprehensive or impartial concern for the whole soul, including each of its parts. The rational part does not deny the appetitive and spirited parts but trains them and satisfies them as is appropriate for them as parts of an ordered whole (591c-592a).
Here the health analogy becomes important. In caring for my whole body, I am concerned with the health and functioning of my bodily parts as parts of a larger, functioning whole. I will not eat as much as I can, but as much as contributes to optimal functioning of someone with my frame and build. Caring for my right arm will not consist in making it as strong as possible but in strengthening it in proportion to the rest of my body. Similarly, in pursuing the good of the whole soul, one will gratify diverse appetites and passions insofar as their gratification contributes to a well functioning tri-partite soul in which reason rules.
The account of deviant men in Books VIII-IX explains why Plato thinks that unhappiness is not due simply to compulsive action on the appetites and passions. He can argue that even calculated restraint in the service of honor, wealth, appetites, and lust does not secure happiness, because it does not represent a comprehensive concern for the various elements of the soul and their role in the agent's own good. If so, Plato can claim that various sorts of c-injustice, not simply compulsive c-injustice, involve p-injustice.
But has he shown that all c-injustice involves p-injustice? Moreover, if Plato is to avoid the fallacy of irrelevance, he must show not only that c-injustice results from p-injustice but also that p- justice produces c-justice. Can he do this? Will the p-just person not only refrain from harming her neighbors, av