#### Meaning without God ####

Wolf begins by asking ‘What do we mean by ‘the meaning of life’?+ If we take the question ‘What is the meaning of life?’ to be asking ‘What is the purpose behind our existence?’, then Wolf thinks that this question is (too) easily answered. If God (or some other creator) exists, then perhaps God had some reason for creating us; however, if God doesn’t exist, then there is simply no reason that we exist.+ Wolf thinks, however, that even though the question of the meaning of life is easily answered—there is a distinct question of whether or not individual lives are meaningful.+ Wolf wants to give an account of what it is that makes an individual life meaningful.
+ She begins by shooting down an alternate account. She doesn’t think that a life is meaningful iff it satisfies a subjective criteria like making the person happy.
+ Paradigm cases of meaningful lives—Gandhi, Mother Teresa, and Einstein, for example are not particularly happy lives.+ Additionally, paradigm cases of meaningless lives-The Blob, for example-are actually filled with a good amount of subjective happiness and contentedness.+ Wolf’s account: a meaningful life is one that is actively and at least somewhat successfully engaged in a project (or projects) of positive value.
+ She asks us to consider the cases of people whose lives are useless due to a lack of activity: The Blob and the idle rich. 
+ From these, she asks us to conclude, with her, that a meaningful life must be one of active engagement.+ She next asks us to consider cases in which a life, though actively engaged, is wasted on a project without any positive value: the corporate executive and the pig farmer. From these, she asks us to conclude, with her, that a meaningful life is one whose projects are of some positive value.+ Finally, she presents cases in which the project around which somebody has organized their life is revealed to be bankrupt-the scientist whose break-through is scooped, for instance. She thinks that this, too, renders a life meaningless. So she requires that the projects be successful. + `Projects’ should be taken broadly to include any kind of ongoing activity or involvement.+ So, too, should the projects engage the person — they should see them as constituting part of what their life is about. The projects must actually have positive value. It is not enough that the individual believes that their projects have positive value. Else, we could not make sense of awakenings in which somebody comes to realize that their life to date has been without meaning, since their projects lack any positive value. Since, then, what the person would supposedly realize would be that their life hasn’t seemed meaningful--but surely, that’s not what people are realizing in such awakenings.
+ The positive value need not be moral value. Having given an account of what people want when they want meaning in their lives, Wolf next considers whether or not meaning is something that we ought to want in our lives. Reasons for doubt:
+ meaningful lives are not necessarily moral lives, nor do they necessarily make the lives of others better—nor do they necessarily make the person whose life is meaningful better off.
+ Wolf’s answer: we should want our lives to be actively engaged with projects of positive objective value—as opposed to projects which are merely subjectively valuable—because to do otherwise is to fail to recognize that one is but a small speck in a vast, value-filled universe. It is to fail to recognize that many things besides one’s own life have objective value.
+ That you are just a speck in a vast, value-filled universe provides you with a reason (an objective reason) to value something besides yourself.+ To be devoted merely to your own happiness is to fail to recognize that things besides yourself have value. It is to act ‘as if’ you are the only valuable thing in existence.  To lead a meaningful life, on the other hand, is to acknowledge that you are just a speck in a vast, value-filled universe. It is to live a life that accords with the facts.

Internal meaning without external meaning

I need to write out this more. 

MLK, Gandhi, Socrates, and so on. 

The life of S has meaning if S devoted himself to a cause, or acquired meaning if S became sufficient attached to a cause. 

1) Life had some dominant, over-all goal which gave direction to a great many of the individual's actions. 

2) Actions were performed with a special zest that was not present before the person became attached to his goal or would not have been present if that person had no such goal. 