---
layout: default
title: Structural Inequalities 
---

## Introduction
Covid-19 exasperated existing inequalities. The goal of this assignment is twofold. First, students will be able to identify some existing inequality that was exasperated by the pandemic. Two, students will be able to consider whether and how that fact should shape our response to the pandemic. 

## Prompt
Chapter 11 discusses structural inequalities and vulnerable groups, and pp.227--228 refers the reader to the relevant sources used in writing the article. 

+ Pick one group discussed in the chapter and one of the relevant articles cited in pp.227-228. 
+ Complete these three tasks: 
	+ Task 1: Provide evidence that the relevant group did suffer disproportionately during the pandemic. Write 150-250 words
	+ Task 2: Provide an annotation of your source and evaluate it. Make sure to say how you used it to complete Task 1. (See the project part 1 details for more information on annotations.)
	+ Task 3: Argue whether the disproportionate effects for your chosen group warrant prioritizing them for medical resources, vaccines, etc. For instance, should the fact prisoners suffer disproportionately from Covid-19 mean they get priority over others for vaccines? Write 150-250 words. 

## Further Instruction 
+ Submit your response to Blackboard as a MSWord file; each NJCU student has free access to 365 Online. 
+ This is a short assignment. Do not quote extensively. Generally, you must always explain in your own words anything that you have quotes; you can't use quotes to do the work for you. 
+ I use plagiarism detection software. Failure to cite material that you use in part or full, in paraphrase or direct quotation, violates NJCU's academic integrity policy. See the syllabus for more information. 


