---
layout: default
title: Essay 1
---

## Introduction

Recall the goal of this course: there are often different plausible interpretations of the same text. You will learn by the end of this course that texts can be read in different ways and learn how to adjudicate different interpretations. Each of the essays in this course will focus on these skills. 

## Prompts

Pick one of the following questions: 

1. Compare and contrast two interpretations of how the Secret Doctrine is supposed to support the thesis that knowledge is perception.
2. Compare and contrast two interpretations of Socrates' refutation of Protagorean relativism.
3. Compare and contrast two interpretations of Socrates' refutation of the Secret Doctrine.
3. Compare and contrast two interpretations of Socrates' refutation of the thesis that knowledge is perception.


## Tasks

In order to complete this essays, do the following:
1. Identify at least one academic source that defends the first interpretation. Identify at least a second academic source that defends the second interpretation. 
	1. In order to identify these sources, you can start with the bibliography in the commentary and the sources I include in the book. Note that encyclopedia entries and random internet website are not academic sources. I expect you to discuss this with me if you are confused. 
2. Devote 1-2 pages explaining each interpretation in turn. 
3. Complete your paper by stating what you take to be the main similarities and main differences between the two interpretations. 

## Word Count

Your submission must be 1000-1250 words long. Essays shorter than 1000 words or longer than 1250 words will lose points. 


## Due Date
Please consult the syllabus and course website for the due date.

## Late Submissions

Per the policies outlined in the syllabus, late work will not be accepted. Any request for special treatment will be ignored. If you foresee difficulties submitting work on time, either because of personal or work commitments, then you should start this paper early and submit it early. 

## Plagiarism

Please review the plagiarism policy on the syllabus. It is critical that you prepare your assignment by yourself.  I will be checking for significant overlaps between submission as well as checking answers against Wikipedia, internet search results, standard essay sites, etc. If you include material in your essay without citing it, you will receive 0 for the assignment. A second violation will result in a 0 for the course, a report to the Dean, and a petition for a note to be added to your permanent academic record.

## Format

Submit your works by first clicking on the relevant assignment in Blackboard. Click on 'browse computer' and upload your document as a .doc, .rtf or .pdf file. Do not send it to me by e-mail or through Blackboard's messaging application. 

## Grading
Please find the rubric and explanation of it [here](/Teaching/Grading/).

## Resources
Please find links to writing resources [here](/Teaching/Resources/)



