---
layout: metweekly
title: The Knowledge Argument

---

### Introduction to the dialog

Socrates and his interlocutors are interested in the nature of knowledge. What is it? They agree that whatever knowledge is, it must have these following two marks: 

1. Knowledge must always be of what is
2. knowledge must always be unerring (152c). 


They consider three suggestions, the first of which is the claim that **knowledge is perception** (KP)(151e). If knowledge is perception, then perception must always be of what is, and perception must always be unerring. What ensues is first an argument that perception does satisfy these requirements and then Socrates' rebuttal.  Our interest is in the metaphysical underpinnings for this argument and Socrates' rebuttal of them. These two claims are as follows: 

Protagoras' Measure Doctrine: 
: “man is the measure of all things: of the things which are, that they are, and of things which are not, that they are not.” (MM)(152a) 

(Note that 'man' translates the Greek word 'anthropos'. This word is neutral with respect to gender. Newer translations use 'human', but that raises issues for how to translate single neuter personal pronouns from Greek into English, e.g., a human is a measure by him/her/them? being such and such. So, just remember that the doctrines presented in Greek are gender neutral.)

Heraclitus' flux doctrine:
:  all things that ‘are’, “are in the process of coming to be”(AF) (152e).

## The Measure Doctrine

Protagoras claims that man is the measure of the things which are, that they are, and of things which are not, that they are not. But what does this mean? Distinguish these two claims

1. Man is the measure of the things which exist, that they exist, and of things which do not exist, that they do not eixst. 
2. Man is the measure of the things which are F, that they are F, and of things which are not F, that they are not F. 

Consider Helen of Troy. The first claim says that Helen exists only because of her relationship to some person. The second claims says that some property Helen has is a property she has only in relationship to some person. It is clear that Protagoras means the second claims. For instance, Socrates tells us that when the wind blows one of us may feel cold and the other not cold. He asks:

> in that case are we going to say that the wind itself, by itself, is cold or not cold? Or shall we listen to Protagoras, and say it is cold for the one who feels cold, and for the other, not cold? (152b).

Protagoras is contrasted to someone who believes that the wind is
say, cold, in virtue itself. He responds that the wind ‘by itself’ does not have this property. Rather, it is cold in virtue of someone experiencing it that way. 

Further evidence is found at 157a where we are told that Protagoras does not believe that anything is itself *hot* or
*anything else*. Again, Socrates states MM as follows: 

> nothing in itself is just one thing: nothing which you could rightly call anything or any kind of thing.(152d) 

An entity X is not in virtue of itself one thing, which is clarified as the claim that X is not in virtue of itself any one kind of thing. 

MM, then, is never presented as *simply* the thesis that man is the measure that an object exists. Rather, it is primarily presented as the thesis that an object is determinate only in virtue of the relationship it has to something else, i.e.,  a man.

MM seems reasonable when we focus on properties like being cold and hot, sweet and sour, etc. Presumably, ice is cold only because we experience it as cold. To some other creature, they might experience ice as hot. The properties 'hot' and 'cold' are not properties of the ice that it has in virtue of itself. It has these properties, if at all, only in virtue of someone or something experiencing it as hot or cold. It can even have both properties at the same time: it might be hot to you and cold to me. It has both properties, but it has them in relationship to different things or people. 

But, MM is not the innocent thesis that objects have **some** features only because they are experienced in certain ways. Distinguish a narrow from a broad version of MM.  Narrow MM is restricted to the “immediate present experience of the individual.”(179c) That is, it is restricted to the proper objects of the five senses, taste, color, etc. The broad version of MM includes, but is not restricted to, that which is perceived through the senses. Protagoras accepts the Broad view:

> As each thing appears to me, so it is for me, and as it appears to you, so it is for you-you and I each being a man (152a). 

Notice that Protagoras uses 'appear' here. There are many things that we are aware of that we do not perceive. An argument can appear valid, a situation can appear dangerous, etc. Restricted to the senses we would not normally use the word ‘perceive’ to cover these cases. I do not smell the argument as valid. So, the claim that knowledge is perception should be taken somewhat loosely: Protagoras has not restricted the thesis to just that which is perceived through the senses. He means that if X appears F to me, then X **is** F, where the appearance can be through the senses, or some other means.

How does MM (along with AF) show that knowledge is perception? Recall our two conditions for knowledge. The first said that knowledge must always be of what is. This means that knowledge is of, or directed towards, an entity haveing some property or other, e.g., I know that Socrates is ugly, I know that ice is cold, I know that the square is a figure. Of course, we can also know that an object exists, but that knowledge will consist in, and be dependent upon, knowing in what way it is determinate, i.e. there is no possibility of knowing that an entity exists without knowing that it is some other way or other. 

If MM is true, then perception obviously satisfies condition 1 for knowledge. If X appears F to me, then X is F. So, in proposing perception as a candidate for knowledge, they are suggesting that, and going on to inquire whether, we can perceive the determination of an object.

Our second condition for knowledge states that knowledge must be unerring. It is unerring in the sense that possession of this power/capacity ensures that one can perform a function flawlessly. If I have 'knowledge', I always judge correctly the condition of whatever I know. Thus, in proposing perception as a candidate for knowledge, they are suggesting that this capacity is always unerring. If we perceive that objects have a certain determination, we cannot be wrong. That is, perception never goes wrong. 

*§3.*

Let's pause to consider how radical MM is. If MM is true, there are no non-subjective facts about reality. The nature of reality would, in effect, be determined by how it appears to us. If this is true, there can be no genuine disagreement about the nature of reality nor anyone with special authority over any aspect of reality. Since, for Protagoras, all men judge truly (170c) MM makes all men equal in expertise (169d).

Consider a few odd implications suggested in the text:

1. After Theodorus introduces Theaetetus to Socrates by pointing to their physical similarities, Socrates questions whether Theodorus has the expertise to evaluate their physical resemblance (145a). If MM is true, there are no experts, say artists, about physical resemblances. 
2. Theaetetus finds it obvious that if he and Socrates were both lyres and Theodorus claimed that they were both similarly tuned, that they should not take his word straightaway. Rather, they must first find out “if he were speaking with any expert knowledge of music.”(144e) They should only trust the judgment of an expert. If MM is true, the musician is not better at judging the tuning of an instrument than a non-expert. 
3. According to Protagoras, there is no reason to favour the doctor’s judgment over his patient’s as to whether the patient will take a fever tomorrow. If MM is true, the doctor’s and the patient’s judgment about their prognosis are equivalent (178c).
4. If MM is true, then the grower’s judgment is no more reliable than the musician as to whether a future wine will be dry or sweet.
5. If MM is true, there are no mishearings and other misperceivings (157e). In a false perception, it may appear to a perceiver than x is F, but in fact x is not-F. If MM is true, such a phenomenon does not occur. Socrates explains: 
	 > “in these conditions we surely have false perceptions. Here it is far from being true that all things which appear to the individual also are. On the contrary, no one of the things which appear to him really is.”(158a). 
	 
 
Theodorus sums up the consequences of MM as follows: “the chief point on which the theory [MM] is convicted of error”(179b) is that it has the consequence that no man is superior in knowledge to any other. 

**MM has the consequence that of each man he is “in reality no better authority than a tadpole.”(161d)**




## Socrates' Response

Socrates diagnoses the source of Theodorus’ chief concern with MM as follows:

> If whatever the individual judges by means of perception is true for him; if no man can access another’s experience better than he, or can claim authority to examine another man’s judgment and see if it be right or wrong; if, as we have repeatedly said, only the individual himself can judge his own world, and what he judges is always true and correct: how could it ever be my friend, that Protagoras was a wise man? (160d-e)

The quote brings to light the relationship Protagoras sees holding
between judgment, (the forming of beliefs), and perception. We form
beliefs solely based on perception for the only material available for
belief formation comes from the immediate perceptual experience. E.g.,
you could not correctly compare the Taj Mahal you see to reports someone
gives of the Taj Mahal for they are both different objects.

Recall that for Protagoras the way an object appears to you is the way
that the object is. There is no object with a stable nature that is
there to be perceived. (166d) There is not even a stable perceiver
waiting to perceive. What seem to be ‘my’ past experiences are someone
else’s past experiences. (166b-c). Rather, the perception, what is
perceived, and even the perceiver are generated all in one go. We cannot
even appeal to our past experiences when forming judgment about the Taj
Mahal. So, it is impossible to “judge anything other than what one is
immediately experiencing.” (167a-b).

So, Protagoras is unable to maintain a clear distinction between
perception and judgment. As soon as I perceive that an object is
someway, I should immediately have the belief that the object is that
way. I cannot bring in material from anything outside of my immediate
experiences to form a judgment. Now Plato’s final argument against KP
rests in pointing to some features of perception and some features of
belief that make it impossible that perception by itself could yield
beliefs. Simply, perception cannot provide all the materials necessary
for beliefs. Rather, belief formation is an active affair that requires
us to appeal to material outside of our immediate experiences.[^7]

We recall that knowledge is of an entity being determinate. Socrates
claims that we cannot grasp through perception the determination of an
object; that it is some F. We saw that this is exactly the view that
Protagoras seems to hold. Rather, to have beliefs requires an activity
of the mind. The argument to show this proceeds by first distinguishing
between perceiving *through* and perceiving *with* our eyes and ears
(184c). If we do not make this distinction, Socrates thinks we will have
difficulty in showing how perceptions converge. Rather, his own view is
that “we perceive with the soul through the senses” (184d). If I
perceive that Helen is beautiful, I perceive this *with* my soul
*through* my eyes. The most important aspect of Socrates’ discussion of
the soul will lie in the role that it plays.

The next step in the argument requires the, maybe problematic, premise
that the objects of perception are peculiar to their senses. What I
perceive through sight, I cannot perceive through hearing. (185a) We
might wonder why I cannot both hear the lyre and see the lyre. Maybe in
giving the examples of colours and sounds, Socrates is suggesting that
we perceive only something like secondary qualities and not the objects
directly. But it is not that clear to me that we should attribute this
type of view to Plato.

However, we can bracket this question and proceed by pointing to
Socrates’ next major move. We attribute to both sight and sound many
things. We think they both ‘are’ and are different from one another and
the same as themselves. (185a-b). However, given that the objects of
perception are peculiar to their powers, Socrates points out that we
cannot perceive these common attributes through any one sense. We cannot
perceive the ‘being’ that we attribute to each.

In claiming that both colour and sound ‘are’, we should not necessarily
take the ‘are’ as primarily existential. For, there are at least two
other ways of reading the ‘are’. A) Yellow ‘is’ in virtue of something
being yellow. B) Yellow ‘is’ in virtue of it being bright or some such.
The prime reason for not reading ‘to be’ here as existential is that
doing so makes it difficult to understand Socrates’ claims that we
cannot perceive the ‘being’ that is common to both. If the ‘is’ was
purely existential we might wonder why we cannot perceive that sound
exists or yellow exists. What substantial difference would there be
between perceiving a colour and perceiving that the colour exists?

However, by construing the main use of ‘to be’ as something other than
purely existential we can mark the distinction. There is a difference if
awareness that a colour ‘is’ is to be aware that it has some
determination; either that something is coloured or that colour has some
attributes. This is shown from Socrates’ discussion of how we perceive
hardness and softness through touch. While we perceive them through
touch, “as regards their being – they fact that they are – their
opposition to one another, and the being, again of this opposition, the
matter is different.”(186b). We perceive hardness and softness. However,
in order to have beliefs about hardness and softness, i.e. beliefs about
their determination we need material from elsewhere. In other words, in
order to have the belief that an entity has a determination we need to
deploy concepts like ‘is similar’ or ‘is one’, concepts that one cannot
acquire in perceiving hardness and softness. In some sense then, the
forming of a belief is active Let me point to Frede’s neat explanation:

> I take it that Plato wants to argue that even the question whether A
> is red is not settled by perception. We may be passively affected by
> the colour red, but to form the belief that something is red
> presupposes and takes a great deal of activity on the part of the
> mind. Hence, we perceive the colour red, but we do not, strictly
> speaking, perceive that A is red. Hence, knowledge, since it always
> involves belief, never is just a matter of perception.[^8]

A passage in the *Sophist* adds support to this reading. The Eleatic
Stranger considers thought a silent speech; a conversation between the
soul and itself. (263e). Now, he considers speech and hence thought to
essentially require affirmation and denial. But when it comes to
thought; affirmation and denial are called belief. (264a) Belief is “the
conclusion of thinking.” (264b) We might say that belief requires assent
or dissent to a thought. Now the Eleatic Stranger states that belief can
arise in two ways. Either purely by thought or by *both* thought and
perception. These latter beliefs he calls appearances.

Perception does not by itself give rise to belief. It can serve a role
in belief formation but never an exhaustive one. There is no possibility
of having beliefs that just draw upon the material provided by our
immediate experiences. This we saw was a crucial if MM was to hold.

§6

I take Theaetetus’ second definition of knowledge, that knowledge is
true judgment (KJ), and Socrates’ criticism of it to be an amplification
of and further defence of the criticism of MM. Most importantly, this
discussion shows that there are better and worse ways of going about
forming beliefs.

The participants construe KJ as having enough merit to consider because
“making true judgment is, at any rate, something free of mistakes”.
(200e5) Socrates’ criticism of KJ is directed at the ways in which true
judgments are made. His overall strategy is as follows:

> P1. There are different ways of making true judgments.
>
> P2. Some ways of making true judgments are not sufficient for
> knowledge.
>
> C. Therefore knowledge is not equivalent to true judgment.

His support for P2 relies on an appeal to the art of ‘speech-makers’ and
‘litigants’. These people “persuade others by means of their art, not
teaching them, but making them judge whatever they want to
judge.”(201a9-10) “\[P\]ersuading is making someone judge something”
(201b5) and Theaetetus accepts that such a method for arriving at true
judgments is not sufficient for knowledge. For the jurymen (those who
have been persuaded) have formed a judgment “about things which it’s
possible to know only if one has seen them and not otherwise.”
(201b8-9). Since they were not present at the scene of the crime, they
did not form their true judgment in the appropriate away. So Theaetetus
accepts that the jurymen have ‘got hold of’ a true judgment without
knowledge. Hence, he accepts that KT is false.

Socrates’ strategy is to first help his interlocutor to realise that
there are different ways of forming a true judgment, e.g. by being
persuaded or by witnessing. He then goes on to help his interlocutor to
realise that he (the interlocutor) cannot accept that all these way of
forming a true judgment are sufficient for knowledge. The moral to be
drawn is that Socrates has special concern for the means by which a true
judgment is made. This is of course runs counter to MM as we saw there
is no possibility of forming judgments in any other way than perception.

Two related questions can be asked: a) what ways of forming a true
judgment are appropriate, b) how should we interpret the claim that the
jurymen formed their true judgment without knowledge. For, the claim
that the jurymen did not make their true judgment with knowledge is
ambiguous. It could mean that the way in which they formed their true
judgment does not yield or result in knowledge. Alternatively, it could
mean that they did not use knowledge to form a true judgment.

I cannot offer a conclusive defence but it is tempting to attribute to
Plato the latter view. On this view, we should not trust the judgments
of those who formed their beliefs without using knowledge to do so. It
is clear to see whose judgment we should trust. Recall at the beginning
of the dialogue that it is pointed out that if someone claims that two
lyres are similarly tuned that we should not take their word
straightaway. Rather we must find out “if he were speaking with any
expert knowledge of music.”(144e) The musicians’ judgment, the expert,
should be trusted. Since her beliefs were formed with knowledge of music
they are most likely to be true

I signalled above that I think the primary sense of knowledge is a power
or capacity. Let me clarify this. Plato says elsewhere: “Let us class
together as “capacities” the powers in us and in other things that
enable us to perform all the various functions which we are capable.”
(Republic 477c) Given what I have said up to this point, I construe the
participants agreement that knowledge is unerring to at least involve
the idea that to possess knowledge is to possess a power that allows one
perform a function flawlessly. Now the sense in which knowledge is a
power is that possessing it allows one to answer questions as to how
things in the perceptual realm are.

*§7*

To conclude, I want to make some tentative and cursory suggestions as to
how I would show that the interpretation I have outlined above is in
harmony with the *Republic. *

In distinguishing knowledge from opining, Plato claims that both are
powers and that both have different objects which they are set over. The
proper object of knowledge is always that which is, the intelligent
realm, while the object of opining is the perceptible realm, a realm of
becoming. Irrespective of whether we can have knowledge of the
perceptible realm, there is evidence that Plato thinks that there are
better judges with regard to that realm. For example, Plato tries to
decide whether those who opine or the philosophers, the ones who have
knowledge, should rule the city. (Book VI) Plato chooses the
philosopher. Why? The obvious explanation is that Plato believes the
philosopher is better at judging what actions and people are just in the
perceptible realm.[^9]

Even if Plato does say at points that philosophers know and do not opine
(479e) we should not take this to mean that the judgment of the
philosopher and the judgment of a bricklayer as to what actions are just
is *on par*. For there is nothing excluding the possibility that someone
with knowledge may be far more accurate at forming judgments than
someone who just opines. Indeed Plato seems to suggest that opinions can
be formed by a power other than opining. For example, he asks
Theaetetus:

> Haven’t you noticed that opinions without knowledge are shameful and
> ugly things? The best of them are blind – or do you think that those
> who express a true opinion without understanding are any different
> from blind people who happen to travel the right road?” (506c)

Opinions with knowledge are contrasted to opinions without knowledge. I
would construe this as a difference between opinions formed in two
different ways. The purpose of pointing to the road is to show that
people do judge things correctly, form opinions, but to do it in a way
that should make us weary of trusting those opinions. They could have as
equally got it wrong. This is analogous to how the jurymen above did not
form their judgments in a way that should make us trust them.

All of this requires that there be an objective fact of the matter as to
how objects in the perceptible realm are and it will be claimed that
Plato in holding that the perceptible realm is in flux clearly holds, in
the Republic, that there is no fact of the matter. However, while Plato
does hold a theory of flux as applied to the perceptible realm in the
Republic, it is not clear that it is Protagoras’ view. For there is no
tension in rejecting the view that the perceptible realm is determinate
in virtue of man but at the same time denying that it is determinate in
virtue of itself. Rather, it could be determinate in virtue of something
else, e.g. the Forms

Let me finish by pointing out that that for Plato there are true and
false judgments about the perceptible realm. The expert, the one with
knowledge is the one who is most likely to have those true beliefs. All
of this clearly suggests that for Plato MM fails, and it fails outright.
Man is not the measure how things in the perceptual realm are. If
anyone, it is the expert who is the measure. He is the measure, not
because he has ‘the criteria’ inside himself. Rather, the criterion as
to whether an object is a certain way is outside the immediate
experience of any perception and it is these criteria that an expert
grasps that allow him be so accurate as to how things in the perceptual
realm are.

***\
Bibliography***

**Burnyeat, M.F.** ‘Knowledge is Perception: Theaetetus (151D-184A)’, in
*Plato*, ed. **Fine, Gail** (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000)

**Cooper, John. M.** ‘Plato on Knowledge in the Theaetetus’, in *Plato*,
ed. **Fine, Gail** (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000)

**Cooper, Neil.** ‘Between Knowledge and Ignorance’, *Phronesis* 31
(1986)

**Cornford, F.M.** *Plato’s Theory of Knowledge*, (London: Kegan Paul,
Trench, Trubner & Co. Ltd, 1935)

**Frede, Michae**l. ‘Observations on Perception in Plato’s Later
Dialogues’ in *Essays in Ancient Philosophy*, (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1987)

**Fine, Gail.** ‘Knowledge and Belief in Republic 5-7’ in *Plato* ed.
**Fine, Gail.** (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000)

**McDowell, John** *Plato Theaetetus* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973)

**Nehamas, Alexander** ‘Plato on the Imperfection of the Sensible World’
in *Plato*, ed. **Fine, Gail**. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000)

**Plato** ‘Republic’ trans. **Grube. G.M.A.** rev. **Reeve, C.D.C.** in
*Plato: Complete Works,* ed. **Cooper, J.M.**, (Indiana: Hackett
Publishing Company, 1997)

**Plato** ‘Sophist’ trans. **White, N.,** rev. **Reeve, C.D.C.** in
*Plato: Complete Works,* ed. **Cooper, J.M.**, (Indiana: Hackett
Publishing Company, 1997)

**Plato** ‘Theaetetus’ trans. **Levett, M.J.** rev. **Burnyeat, M.** in
*Plato: Complete Works,* ed. **Cooper, J.M.**, (Indiana: Hackett
Publishing Company, 1997)

[^1]: Translations are taken from Levett rev. Burnyeat

[^2]: See, for example, Cornford (1935), p.7

[^3]: At 157d Plato includes good and beautiful amongst the qualities we
    perceive. Hence, we should be hesitant in thinking that he is here
    restricting the thesis to sensible qualities.

[^4]: I am hesitant in ascribing Plato the view that knowledge is of
    propositions. Talk of propositions risks bringing in extra entities
    that Plato would not accept exist.

[^5]: Socrates and company agree that ἐπιστήμε and ςοφὶα are the same.
    While ςοφὶα is most naturally translated as ‘wisdom’, I follow
    Burnyeat in translating it as ‘expertise’ in this context. (Burnyeat
    2000)

[^6]: If space allowed, I would discuss an argument found from
    182d-183a. The nub is that AF (and hence MM) threatens the
    possibility of language. If space allowed, I would argue that Plato
    could not have accepted narrow-MM for he holds views about language
    which would commit him to the impossibility of speaking and
    thinking.

[^7]: C.f. Frede (1987), p.5

[^8]: Frede (1987), p.7

[^9]: C.f. Fine (2000), p.218. I suspend judgment as to whether Fine is
    correct that there is knowledge of sensibles.
