---
layout: default
title: Glossary

---


### Glossary

**a priori knowledge:** Knowledge gained independently of or prior to
sense experience.

**a posteriori knowledge:** Knowledge that depends entirely on sense
experience.

**act-utilitarianism:** The idea that the rightness of actions depends
solely on the overall well-being produced by *individual actions*.

**agent causation:** The view that a free action is caused by an agent
(person) and is not wholly determined by previous events.

**agnostic:** Someone who neither accepts nor denies God’s existence.

**analytic statement:** A logical truth whose denial results in a
contradiction.

**appeal to ignorance:** The fallacy of arguing either that (1) a claim
is true because it hasn’t been proven false or (2) a claim is false
because it hasn’t been proven true.

**appeal to popularity:** The fallacy of arguing that a claim must be
true not because it is backed by good reasons but simply because many
people believe it.

**appeal to the person:** The fallacy of rejecting a statement on the
grounds that it comes from a particular person, not because the
statement, or claim, itself is false or dubious.

**argument:** A statement coupled with other statements that are meant to support that statement.

**argument from evil:** An argument purporting to show that since there is unnecessary evil, an all-powerful, all-knowing, and all-good God must not exist.

**argument from religious experience:** An argument of this form: A
person seems to have experienced God; the experience must have actually been a genuine encounter with God; therefore, God probably exists.

**aristocracy:** A society ruled by the best citizens.

**atheism:** The denial of the existence of God.

**atheist:** Someone who denies God’s existence.

**axiology:** The study of value, including both aesthetic value and
moral value.

**begging the question:** The fallacy of trying to prove a conclusion by using that very same conclusion as support.

**capitalism:** A political economic system that lets the means of
production accrue to fewer people through the workings of a free market. In such a system, wealth goes to anyone who can acquire it in the marketplace.

**Cartesian dualism:** The view that mind (or soul) and body are
completely independent of one another and interact causally.

**categorical imperative:** Kant’s fundamental moral principle, which he formulates as (1) “I am never to act otherwise than so *that I could
also will that my maxim should become a universal law*,” and (2) “So act
as to treat humanity, whether in thine own person or in that of any
other, in every case as an end withal, never as a means only.”

**causal closure of the physical:** The principle that the world is a
closed system of physical causes and effects.

**classical liberalism:** The view that the state should protect personal
freedoms as well as the right to pursue one’s own social and economic
well-being in a free market without interference from others.

**cognitive relativism:** The doctrine that the truth about something
depends on what persons or cultures believe.

**communism:** Commonly, socialism within a totalitarian system.

**compatibilism:** The view that although determinism is true, our
actions can still be free.

**composition:** The fallacy of arguing erroneously that what can be said
of the parts can also be said of the whole.

**conclusion:** In an argument, the statement being supported.

**consequentialist theory:** A moral theory in which the rightness of
actions depends solely on their consequences or results.

**cosmological arguments:** Arguments that try to show that from the fact
that the universe exists, God exists.

**cultural relativism:** The view that right actions are those endorsed
by one’s culture.

**deductive argument:** An argument intended to give logically conclusive support to its conclusion.

**deism:** Belief in one God that created the world but left it
unattended to run on its own.

**democracy:** Rule by the people as a whole.

**deontological (or nonconsequentialist) theory:** A moral theory in
which the rightness of actions is determined not solely by their
consequences but partly or entirely by their intrinsic nature.

**determinism:** The doctrine that every event is determined by preceding events and the laws of nature.

**dharma:** The Buddha’s system of teachings about the true nature of
reality and how to live correctly to transcend it.

**distributive justice (or social justice):** The fair distribution of
society’s benefits and burdens—such things as jobs, income, property,
liberties, rights, welfare aid, taxes, and public service.

**divine command theory:** The doctrine that God is the creator of
morality.

**division:** The fallacy of arguing erroneously that what can be said of
the whole can be said of the parts.

**empiricism:** The view that our knowledge of the empirical world comes solely from sense experience.

**epiphenomenalism:** The notion that mental properties do not cause
anything, but merely accompany physical processes.

**epistemology:** The study of knowledge.

**equivocation:** The fallacy of assigning two different meanings to the same significant word in an argument.

**ethical egoism:** The view that right actions are those that further
one’s own best interests.

**ethics (moral philosophy):** The study of morality using the methods of philosophy.

**ethics of care:** A moral perspective that emphasizes the unique
demands of specific situations and the virtues and feelings that are
central to close personal relationships.

**evidentialism:** The view that we are justified in believing something only if it is supported by sufficient evidence.

**fallacy:** A common but bad argument.

**false dilemma:** The fallacy of arguing erroneously that since there
are only two alternatives to choose from, and one of them is
unacceptable, the other one must be true.

**feminist ethics:** An approach to morality aimed at advancing women’s interests, underscoring their distinctive experiences and
characteristics, and advancing the obvious truth that women and men are morally equal.

**functionalism:** The view that the mind is the functions that the brain performs.

**genetic fallacy:** The fallacy of arguing that a statement can be
judged true or false based on its source.

**hard determinism:** The view that free will does not exist, that no one acts freely.

**identity theory:** The view that mental states are identical to
physical brain states.

**incompatibilism:** The view that if determinism is true, no one can act freely.

**indeterminism:** The view that not every event is determined by
preceding events and the laws of nature.

**inductive argument:** An argument intended to give probable support to its conclusion.

**justice:** The idea that people should get what is fair or what is
their due.

**Kant’s theory:** The theory that right actions are those that accord
with the categorical imperative.

**karma:** The universal principle that our actions result in deserved
pleasure or pain in this life or the next.

**liberalism:** The political theory that puts primary emphasis on the
liberty and rights of individuals against encroachments by the state.

**libertarianism (metaphysical):** The view that some actions are free, for they are caused, or controlled, by the person, or agent.

**libertarianism (political):** The doctrine that emphasizes personal
freedoms and the right to pursue one’s own social and economic
well-being in a free market without interference from others.

**logic:** The study of correct reasoning.

**logical behaviorism:** The idea that mental states are dispositions to behave in a particular way in certain circumstances.

**materialism (or physicalism):** The doctrine that every object and
event in the world is physical.

**meritocracy:** A system of rule by those most qualified to govern.

**metaphysics:** The study of reality, an inquiry into the fundamental
nature of the universe and the things in it.

**mind–body problem:** The issue of what mental phenomena are and how
they relate to the physical world.

**monotheism:** Belief in one God.

**moral evil:** Evil that comes from human choices and actions and the
bad things that arise from them.

**moral absolutism:** The belief that objective moral principles allow no exceptions or must be applied the same way in all cases and cultures.

**moral objectivism:** The view that there are moral standards that are true or correct for everyone.

**moral relativism:** The view that moral standards do not have
independent status but are relative to what individuals or cultures
believe.

**moral theory:** A theory that explains why an action is right or wrong or why a person or a person’s character is good or bad.

**morality:** Beliefs about right and wrong actions and good and bad
persons or character.

**multiple realizability:** The capacity to be realized or instantiated in a variety of forms and materials.

**natural evil:** Evil that results from the workings of nature.

**nirvana:** Enlightenment: the ultimate aim of all Buddhist practice and the final liberation to which all the Buddha’s teachings point.

**ontological argument:** An argument that tries to demonstrate God’s
existence by logical analysis of the concept of God.

**panentheism:** The view that although God and the world are distinct, the world is part of God.

**pantheism:** The view that God and the universe are one and the same
thing, a divine Whole.

**political philosophy:** The study of political societies using the
methods of philosophy.

**polytheism:** Belief in many gods.

**premise:** In an argument, a statement supporting the conclusion.

**principle of induction:** The presumption that events that followed one another in the past will do the same in the future, that the future will be like the past.

**problem of free will:** The challenge of reconciling determinism with our intuitions or ideas about personal freedom.

**property dualism:** The view that mental properties are nonphysical
properties arising from, but not reducible to, physical properties.

**propositional knowledge:** Knowledge of a proposition.

**psychological egoism:** The theory that people always act out of
self-interest.

**rationalism:** The view that through unaided reason we can come to know what the world is like.

***reductio ad absurdum:*** An argument of this form: If you assume that a set of statements is true, and yet you can deduce a false or absurd statement from it, then the original set of statements as a whole must be false.

**rule-utilitarianism:** The doctrine that a right action is one that
conforms to a rule that, if followed consistently, would create for
everyone involved the most beneficial balance of well-being over
suffering.

**skepticism:** The view that we lack knowledge in some fundamental way.

**slippery slope:** The fallacy of arguing erroneously that a particular action should not be taken because it will lead inevitably to other actions resulting in some dire outcome.

**social contract theory:** The view that justice is secured, and the
state is made legitimate, through an agreement among citizens of the
state or between the citizens and the rulers of the state.

**socialism:** The doctrine that the means of production (property,
factories, businesses) should be owned or controlled by the people,
either communally or through the state.

**Socratic method:** Question-and-answer dialogue in which propositions are methodically scrutinized to uncover the truth.

**statement (claim):** An assertion that something is or is not the case and is therefore the kind of utterance that is either true or false.

**straw man:** The fallacy of misrepresenting of a person’s views so they can be more easily attacked or dismissed.

**subjective idealism:** The doctrine that all that exist are minds and their ideas.

**subjective relativism:** The view that right actions are those endorsed by an individual.

**substance dualism:** The notion that mind and body consist of two
fundamentally different kinds of stuff, or substances.

**synthetic statement:** A statement that is not analytic.

**teleological arguments:** Arguments that try to show that God must
exist because features of the universe show signs of purpose or design.

**theism:** Belief in the existence of God.

**theist:** Someone who believes in God.

**theodicy:** A defense of the traditional conception of God in light of the existence of evil.

**utilitarianism:** The view that right actions are those that result in the most beneficial balance of good over bad consequences for everyone involved.

**virtue ethics:** A moral theory that focuses on the development of
virtuous character.

**welfare liberalism:** A form of liberalism, the aim of which is to
preserve individual liberties while ensuring the general welfare of the citizenry.
