---
layout: default
title: Reading Question 4
---

## Gobbets (Book III Ch.6--12)


Sentence 1:
: The person who is called "courageous" in the full sense, then, is the one who is unanxious where noble death is concerned and the things that are an imminent threat of death. And the things that occur in war are most of all of this sort (1115b32).

Sentence 2:
: If the same is also true where courage is concerned, then death and wounds will be painful to a courageous person and he will suffer them involuntarily. But he will endure them because it is noble to do so or shameful not to (1118a6).

Sentence 3:
: An intemperate person, then, has an appetite for all pleasant things or for the most pleasant ones, and appetite leads him to choose these before the others (1118b38).


## Introduction 

There are three gobbets. The numbers after each sentence refer to the Bekker numbers. You can find the Bekker numbers by first attending to the number at the top corner of each page and then looking for the numbers that occur in brackets after specific words. 

Remember 'gobbets' are reading quetions. You must do three things: 
1. Explain the context of the sentence, i.e., explain what Aristotle is doing in the chapter and how the sentence fits into that project. 
2. Explain the content/meaning of the sentence. 
3. Assess the sentence, i.e., state what you think the sentence contributes to Aristotle's overall project, or raise an objection, or raise an interesting question, etc.  

Please submit through Blackboard. Click on 'gobbets' in the left panel. 