---
layout: default
title: Reading Question 8
---

## Book 7, ch.1-10 


Sentence 1:
: The starting point of the investigation is whether a person who has self-control and a person who lacks it differ in the things they are concerned with or in the way they are concerned with them--I mean, whether a person who lacks self-control lacks it solely by being concerned with such-and-such things or solely by the way he is concerned with them, or as a result of both (1146b14).

Sentence 2:
: Accordingly, it is clear that lack of self-control regarding appetites is more shameful than lack of self-control regarding spirit, and that self- control and lack of self-control are concerned with appetites and pleasures that are bodily (1150a25).

Sentence 3:
: It is evident from these considerations, then, that the state of a person who has self-control is excellent and that the state of one who lacks self- control is base (1151b28).


## Introduction 

There are three gobbets. The numbers after each sentence refer to the Bekker numbers. You can find the Bekker numbers by first attending to the number at the top corner of each page and then looking for the numbers that occur in brackets after specific words. 

Remember 'gobbets' are reading quetions. You must do three things: 
1. Explain the context of the sentence, i.e., explain what Aristotle is doing in the chapter and how the sentence fits into that project. 
2. Explain the content/meaning of the sentence. 
3. Assess the sentence, i.e., state what you think the sentence contributes to Aristotle's overall project, or raise an objection, or raise an interesting question, etc.  

Please submit through Blackboard. Click on 'gobbets' in the left panel. 