---
layout: default
title: Reading Question 9
---

## Gobbets (Book VIII)


Sentence 1:
: There are, then, three forms of friendship, equal in number to the proper objects of love, since in the case of each proper object of love there is a corresponding way of reciprocal loving that does not go unawares, and those who love each other wish good things to the other in the way in which they love (1156a7).

Sentence 2:
: These friendships are in fact coincidentally friendships, then, since a person who is beloved in that way is loved not insofar as he is precisely who he is but insofar as he provides some good, in the one case, or some pleasure, in the other (1156a17).


Sentence 3:
: To be a friend to many people, however, in a way that accords with complete friendship, is not possible, just as it is not possible to be in love with many people at the same time. (1158a9).


## Introduction 

There are three gobbets. The numbers after each sentence refer to the Bekker numbers. You can find the Bekker numbers by first attending to the number at the top corner of each page and then looking for the numbers that occur in brackets after specific words. 

Remember 'gobbets' are reading quetions. You must do three things: 
1. Explain the context of the sentence, i.e., explain what Aristotle is doing in the chapter and how the sentence fits into that project. 
2. Explain the content/meaning of the sentence. 
3. Assess the sentence, i.e., state what you think the sentence contributes to Aristotle's overall project, or raise an objection, or raise an interesting question, etc.  

Please submit through Blackboard. Click on 'gobbets' in the left panel. 