---
layout: default
title:   Signature Assignment 
---

Final Projects
--------------

This assignment will be completed in several stages. You will work in
groups of 3–4. Your group will pick a topic from the list below. You
will research the current status of the topic in question and then use
the ethical theories introduced in Module 6 to address it.

Pick a Topic (Class Assignment)
-------------------------------

Each group picks one of the questions from the list below. Note that
each group must pick a different topic:

1.  Is it permissible to abort a fetus?

2.  Ought a doctor help her terminally ill patient die if the patient
    requests it?

3.  Should we ever execute people for their crimes?

4.  Should we allow people to reproduce by cloning?

5.  Should prostitution be legal?

6.  To what extent ought we give to charity?

7.  May I pirate music?

8.  Should recreational drug use be illegal?

9.  Is it permissible to eat meat?

10. On whom are we allowed to perform medical trials?

11. Should corporations be considered persons?

12. Should we curb climate change for the sake of future generations?

Draft 1: Background Research
----------------------------

In the first part of your project, you will be collecting and thinking
through the information needed to write your final paper. Decide between
yourselves how to fairly proportion the work, but clearly indicate in
your submission how you divided up the tasks. Note that you will be
grading each others’ level of participation.

Applied Ethicists are more concerned with particular, practical cases
than with more abstract theoretical questions. They want to know how, if
at all, a hospital should distribute donated organs, whether it is
permissible to bribe officials in foreign states to do business, etc.
The questions listed above are all hot topics in the United States. Your
job will be to answer them as an Applied Ethicist. In this first draft,
write three short documents:

1.  After researching articles at www.nj.com from the last 5 years,
    outline the major downsides and benefits of the current policy
    governing your chosen issue for society as a whole. What are the
    likely major downsides and benefits for society as a whole if the
    policy is changed? Provide full citations to the newspaper articles.
    (600–800 words)

2.  After researching articles at www.nj.com, identify some specific
    individuals who have been affected by your chosen issue. Detail the
    real life downsides and benefits to everyone involved. What would
    the benefits and downsides have been if the event had not occurred?
    Back up your answer with evidence from the newspaper articles.
    (600–800 words)

3.  Explain both act utilitarianism and rule utilitarianism. How are
    they different? (600–800 words) Use the textbook and include
    proper citations.

Oral Presentation
-----------------

Each group will prepare a power point presentation on their chosen
topic. Each presentation should be 10–15 minutes long with a minimum of
6 slides and a maximum of 12.

-   The presentation should **summarize** the findings of the threes
    documents prepared in the research phase.

-   Each member of the group must present at least one slide.

Final Submission
----------------

You must prepare your final submission by yourself, not in groups. You
can refer to the documents prepared by your group as background
research, but you must cite those group members who were responsible for
those documents.

**Prompt:** Compare and contrast how the act and rule utilitarian would
answer your chosen question. Which theory has the most unsettling
consequences? Give reasons for your answer. (1250–1500 words)

Grade Breakdown
---------------

1.  Background Research: 10 pts.

2.  Oral Presentation: 10 pts.

3.  Final Submission: 10 pts.

4.  Peer Evaluation of Work Contribution: 5 pts.

5.  **Total Points: 35pts**

The first two grades will be awarded to your group contribution, the
third to your individual final paper, and the fourth by averaging each
group member’s evaluation of your level of participation.

-   *12/06/2015,* Research documents due through Blackboard.

-   *12/08/2015,* In-class presentations.

-   *12/15/2015,* Final submission due through Blackboard.

General Education Program Assessment
------------------------------------

General Education courses participate in programmatic assessment of the
six University-wide student learning goals. They include instruction in,
and assessment of, at least two of these learning goals. Signature
assignments, which may include document, picture, sound, or video files,
are uploaded to a secure server for anonymous distribution to the NJCU
assessment team, which scores them using approved program rubrics. While
instructors also grade their own students’ signature assignments, which
count toward the course grade, assessment team results are aggregated to
provide information about the Gen Ed program as a whole. Your name will
not be included in any programmatic assessment data.

Academic Integrity
------------------

All the work you turn in (including papers, drafts, and discussion board
posts) must be written by you specifically for this course. It must
originate with you in form and content with all contributory sources
fully and specifically acknowledged. Being a student at NJCU requires
you to follow [NJCU’s Academic Integrity
Policy.](http://www.njcu.edu/uploadedFiles/About_NJCU/Governance_and_Organization/University_Senate/Policies/Academic%20INTEGRITY%20POLICY%20FINAL%202-04.pdf)
Penalties for violations are as follows: 1st infraction will result in a
0 for the assignment. 2nd infraction will result in a 0 for the entire
course & application for permanent record on student’s transcript.
(Repeated violations can lead to expulsion from NJCU).

-   If a document is plagiarized during the research phase, the penalty
    will apply to the group as a whole. Make sure you are happy with
    each document before it is submitted.
