## NJCU HONORS 360
(modified from Dr. Virginia Ochoa-Winemiller)**Objective:**
: To explore the relationship betweeneducation and place. In particular, how does thelandscape represent education, its levels (e.g. elementary, middle, college, special), and organization (administration, learning, food, leisure, movement, reflection, to mention some).**Task:** 
: Working with another classmate, you will explore the NJCU campus and nearby areas using the methods of participant observation, interviewing, and landscape assessment. You and your teammate are encouraged to ask questions, take notes, and write your observations and insights as soon as possible after the visit.
Your journal entry must include:
1. Date, time2. Weather conditions3. Name, type, and address of site visited4. Record the following information:	1. Purpose of educational site. If a building, what is the building’s function? Is it a library, a lab, etc? If an outside location, or some other type of place, what is the  purpose of that location (educational or other)?
	2. Observe and describe the markings that clearly indicate the  place's function is educational, e.g., signs, statues, types of architecture, etc. In other words, what is it about the place that tells you it is an educational one and not something else?
	3. What view of education do you think the relevant place embodies? What values are being communicated? For instance, does it suggest that education requires quiet reflection, or perhaps open communication?
	4. Observe the students, staff, and faculty. Observe their interaction. Note their age, race/ethnicity, gender. Is the population diverse? Do people from diverse groups interact with one another?
What do you think about these places for education? Do you agreewith the values communicated? Do you like the way peopleinteracted?