---
layout: default
title: 164th and Broadway
---

+ [View from apt](aptview)
+ [Timeline](chart.jpeg)
+ [Death Toll](deathtoll.jpeg)

## Major Ethical Issues
I designed this course partly to help me through the ethical decisions I made as well as those that others made that affected me and my family. There are four decisions I will by way of illustrations: 

1. Study Abroad: I was empowered to decide in late February whether to continue with a planned study abroad trip with the honors students. With little information, I considered my responsibilities to my students' education and health, and I considered my obligations to my family. 
2. OB/GYN: My wife, a resident physician, requested her OB/GYN to write a letter excusing her from work for the remainder of her pregnancy; she was eight months pregnant. Even if she could not be excused work altogether, we requested that my wife be excused from procedures with the greatest exposure risk. Her doctor was the program coordinator at NYP/Columbia, the hospital my wife also worked at. The OB/GYN replied that she couldn't grant this request as she would then need to grant it to other employees, which would undermine the hospital's capacity to deliver care. Should she have viewed my wife as an employee or as her patient? Who did she have a greater obligation to? My wife happened to be on a somewhat safe elective, but she was subsequently transferred to the wards where she initially treated Covid patients as she was approaching term. After CDC guidance was updated to suggest pregnant women were at higher risk, she spent the remaining few weeks on a tele-medicine/Covid rotation.
3. Daycares/playground: Gov. Cuomo announced in spring 2020 that daycares and playgrounds would close. Health care workers couldn't stay home to care for their children. I was chair of the Philosophy Dept., had several courses, and struggled to care for our oldest from home while working remotely. I watched with increasing frustration as outside dining and drinking returned but daycares and even playgrounds did not. While we needed to keep children safe, Gov. Cuomo and other leaders prioritized commerce over education; they could have kept restaurants and bars closed and reopened schools. Did they make the right choice? And did society have any special obligation to my family and the families of other essential workers who carried us through the crisis? Are others obligated to risk themselves for my family given that we risked ourselves for others? 
4. Parental vs. physician duties: my wife returned to work a few weeks after giving birth. She would shower when she returned home before nursing, but the risk to her and my family was significant. During the summer of 2020, her hours were more manageable, but she easily worked more than 80hrs per week once the surge began again; the legal maximum for trainee doctors is 80 hours per week. Her work put her and her very young family at risk. She saw them less than is healthy. And the number of deaths she say put such an emotional toil on her that the family environment was bleak to say the least. Many doctors quit or changed field to protect their families. Should she have done the same? Or did she have an obligation to society to risk her family to care for the ill? 