---
layout: default
title: Introduction
---

# Introduction

## Why this course? 
Ethics concerns the study of what actions to perform and what actions to avoid, and, more importantly, involves the study of why we should and shouldn't act in certain ways. We may agree that murder is wrong, but why is murder wrong? We may agree we ought to save a drowning child, but why is saving that child the right thing to do? There are several dominant theories that attempt to explain why actions are right or wrong, and we will be studying several of them in this course. But studying these theories is valuable, and for some only interesting, because they help guide our actions and evaluate the actions of others; they help determine how we should behave and how others should behave towards us. 

There are different ways to teach ethics, but courses often focus on real ethical questions and how ethical theories can help answer them. The Covid-19 pandemic is a perfect test case. Each of us has grappled with ethical decisions and each of us have been affected by the ethical decisions of other, whether they be family members, physicians, leaders, etc. I designed this course partly to help me through the ethical decisions I made as well as those that others made that affected me and my family. I hope that you all will also benefit from thinking reflectively about your experience of the pandemic too. To illustrate the topics of this course, I am going to describe four decisions I am uncertain about: 

1. Study Abroad: I was empowered to decide in late February 2020 whether to continue with a planned study abroad trip with the honors students. With little information, I considered my responsibilities to my students' education and health, and I considered my obligations to my family. How should I balance my obligations to my students and my family? 
2. OB/GYN: My wife, a resident physician, requested her OB/GYN to write a letter excusing her from work for the remainder of her pregnancy; she was eight months pregnant. Even if she could not be excused work altogether, we requested that she be excused from procedures with the greatest exposure risk. Her doctor was the program coordinator at NYP/Columbia, the hospital my wife also worked. Her physician replied that she couldn't grant this request as she would then need to grant it to other employees, which would undermine the hospital's capacity to deliver care. Should she have viewed my wife as an employee or as her patient? Who did she have a greater obligation to, my wife or the hospital as a whole? 
3. Daycares/playground: Gov. Cuomo announced in spring 2020 that daycares and playgrounds would close. Health care workers couldn't stay home to care for their children. I was chair of the Philosophy Dept., had several courses, and struggled to care for our oldest from home while working remotely. I watched with increasing frustration as outside dining and drinking returned but daycares and even playgrounds did not. While we needed to keep children safe, Gov. Cuomo and other leaders prioritized commerce over education; they could have kept restaurants and bars closed and reopened schools. Did they make the right choice?  
4. Parental vs. physician duties: my wife returned to work a few weeks after giving birth. She would shower when she returned home before nursing, but the risk to her and our young family was significant. During the summer of 2020, her hours were more manageable, but she easily worked more than 80hrs per week once the surge began again; the legal maximum for trainee doctors is 80 hours per week. Her work put her and her very young family at risk. She saw them less than is healthy. And the number of deaths she saw put such an emotional toil on her that the family environment was bleak to say the least. Many doctors quit or changed fields to protect their families. Should she have done the same? Or did she have an obligation to care for the ill despite the increased risk to her family? 


The first decision was mine. The other three are decisions others made that directly affected me. What was the right call in each case? In each scenario, the person deciding had competing obligations to adjudicate between, they had to favor X over Y. The study of ethics should help us decide how to balance often conflicting values. It may show us that the values do not conflict. Or it may show us that one value has priority over another. But, ethics is most interesting, at least for me, when we must juggle genuinely conflicting obligations.

Think back through the last few years. What decisions did you make that involved conflicting obligations? What were those obligations and what did you ultimately decide? What decisions did other make that affected you the most? And what competing obligations were they trying to adjudicate? 