## Motion 
The original debate between relationalist and absolutist views of space arose from the Newtonian theory of motion. Newton had distinguished between two kinds of motion: relative and absolute. Relative motion is the change in spatial relations between objects. Imagine two people in conversation as they descend into the depths of the London Underground. One descends by means of the stairs, the other on the escalator. Relative to the walls around them, they are moving at the same rate. As a consequence (since they are moving in the same direction), both are stationary relative to each other, and so can continue their conversation. But now the one descending the stairs stops to tie his shoelaces. His companion, to be polite, now starts to ascend the downwards-moving escalator, so that she remains stationary relative to her friend, and as a result is moving with considerable speed relative to the escalator steps. Now, in addi- tion to these relative motions, there is, or so we are powerfully inclined to suppose, what we might call real motion. If A is in motion relative to B, then B is correspondingly in motion relative to A. But is it A or B that is really moving, the other remaining stationary? Or are they both moving? 

Absolute motion is the name given to motion relative to space itself. If there are such things as points in space, independently of any other object, then these points are by definition stationary (since to be stationary is to stay in the same place and a point is a place). Anything which moves relative to these points is in motion. 


## Newton

According to Newton, the physical furniture of the universe consists entirely of infinitesimal material points, commonly referred to as particles. Extended objects, or objects that take up finite volumes of space, are treated as assemblages of particles, and the behaviors of objects are determined, at least in principle, by the behaviors of the particles of which they are composed. The properties of particles include mass, electric charge, and position.
The Newtonian conception is both complete and deterministic. It is complete in the sense that, if it were possible to list, for each moment of past time, what particles existed, what their masses, electric charges, and other intrinsic properties were, and what positions they occupied, the list would represent absolutely everything that could be said about the physical history of the universe; it would contain everything that existed and every event that occurred. The Newtonian conception is deterministic in the sense that, if it were possible to list, for a particular moment of time, the position and other intrinsic properties of each particle in the universe, as well as how the position of each particle is changing as time flows forward, the entire future history of the universe, in every detail, would be predictable with absolute certainty.
The rate at which the position of a particle is changing at a particular time, as time flows forward, is called the velocity of the particle at that time. The rate at which the velocity of a particle is changing at a particular time, as time flows forward, is called the acceleration of the particle at that time. The Newtonian conception stipulates that force, which acts to maintain or alter the motion of a particle, arises exclusively between pairs of particles; furthermore, the forces that any two particles exert on each other at any given moment depend only on what sorts of particles they are and on their positions relative to each other. Thus, within Newtonian mechanics (the science of the motion of bodies under the action of forces), the specification of the positions of all the particles in the universe at a particular time and of what sorts of particles they are amounts to a specification of what forces are operating on each of those particles at that time.
According to Newton’s second law of motion, a certain very simple mathematical relation invariably holds between the total force on any particle at a particular time, its acceleration at that time, and its mass; the force acting on a particle is equal to the particle’s mass multiplied by its acceleration: F = ma

The application of this law (hereafter “Newton’s law of motion”) can be illustrated in detail in the following example. Suppose that one wished to calculate, for each particle i in a certain subsystem of the universe, the position of that particle at some future time t = T. For each particle at some initial time t = 0, one is given the particle’s position (x0i), velocity (v0i), mass (mi), electric charge (ci), and all other intrinsic properties.

One way of performing the calculation is by means of a succession of progressively better approximations. Thus, the first approximation might be to calculate the positions of all the particles at t = T by supposing that their velocities are constant and equal to v0i at t = 0 throughout the interval between t = 0 and t = T. This approximation would place particle i at x0i + v0i(T) at t = T. It is apparent, however, that the approximation would not be very accurate, because in fact the velocities of the particles would not remain constant throughout the interval (unless no forces were at work on them).

Newtonian mechanics predicts the motions of particles, or how the positions of particles in space change with time. But the very possibility of there being a theory that predicts how the positions of particles in space change with time requires that there be a determinate matter of fact about what position each particle in space happens to occupy. In other words, such a theory requires that space itself be an independently existing thing—the sort of thing a particle might occupy a certain part of, or the sort of thing relative to which a particle might move.
## Relationalism 


How could a measurement of the absolute position in space of any particle, or any assemblage of particles, could be carried out? What observation, for example, would determine whether every single particle in the universe suddenly had moved to a position exactly one million kilometres to the left of where it was before? 

Therefore, something can be a fact about space only if it is relational—a fact about the distances between particles. Talk of facts about “absolute” positions is simply nonsense.

Relationism, as this view of the nature of space is called, asserts that space is not an independently existing thing but merely a mathematical representation of the infinity of different spatial relations that particles may have to each other. In the opposing view, known as absolutism, space is an independently existing thing, and what facts about the universe there may be do not necessarily coincide with what can in principle be established by measurement.

“In claiming that objects inherit their spatial properties from the regions of space that they occupy, the substantivalist is inserting an invisible and redundant intermediary between objects. We cannot observe space itself, but we can observe objects at various distances from one another. The most economical way of making sense of this is simply to say that objects are directly related to one another by spatial relations. Instead of appealing to space-object relations, we can appeal to object-object relations, where the relations in question are of a spatial sort. These spatial relations should not be thought of as material objects in their own right, but as distinctive properties, of a relational sort, that material objects can possess.” (Dainton, 141)

Space and time do not exist as independent substances, there is only the material content of the universe. Space and time are merely defined through spatiotemporal relations among the material objects in the universe.
## Einstein 

Temporal and spatial intervals vary by reference frame