---
layout: default
title: Presentation 1
---

## Presentation 1

Humanity has struggled through many pandemics, and many of the difficulties we have faced are similar to those our predecessors have grappled with. The goal of this assignment is to teach you just how often humanity has struggled through a pandemic, and also to teach you how, despite being separated by time and place, our struggles are not so different from those of our predecessors. 

During our library orientation, you will learn how to research historical pandemics. Pick *one*. Research that pandemic using the tools from our library session. Then present on that research to the class. This is a very short presentation, so no slides are needed. During your presentation, you should: 

1. Name the pandemic. 
2. Identify the one source you are using and say something about the quality of that source, e.g., peer-reviewed or not, the author is, publisher, library databases location, etc. (NB: Do not use simple google searches; we're learning how to use library resources!)
3. Provide a few details of the virus and briefly mention one ethical question raised by your research of how we tried beat that virus.  

Further instructions: 

+ We will conduct the class next Wednesday and the presentations on zoom. 
+ The presentations will be recorded; I will review the recordings to grade the presentation.  
+ You have 5 minutes! I will set a timer. This is not a lot of time, so you will need to really practice to get everything you want said in those 5 minutes. 