---
layout: default
title: Structural Inequalities Presentation
---

## Introduction
Covid-19 aggravated existing inequalities. The goal of this assignment is twofold. First, students will be able to identify some existing inequality that was aggravated by the pandemic. Two, students will be able to consider whether and how that fact should shape our response to the pandemic. 

## Prompt
Chapter 11 discusses structural inequalities and vulnerable groups, and pp.227--228 refers the reader to the relevant sources used in writing the article. 

+ Pick one group discussed in the chapter and one of the relevant articles cited in pp.227-228. 
+ Prepare a five minute presentation with **three slides**
	+ Slide 1: Provide evidence that the relevant group did suffer disproportionately during the pandemic. 
	+ Slide 2: Provide an annotation of your source and evaluate it. Make sure to say how you used it to create slide 1. (See the project part 1 details for more information on annotations.)
	+ Slide 3: Argue whether the disproportionate effects for your chosen group warrant prioritizing them for medical resources, vaccines, etc. For instance, should the fact prisoners suffer disproportionately from Covid-19 mean they get priority over others for vaccines? 


## Further instructions:

+ **Submit your slides before class next Wednesday**
+ We will conduct the class next Wednesday and the presentations on zoom.
+ The presentations will be recorded; I will review the recordings to grade the presentation.
+ You have 5 minutes! I will set a timer. This is not a lot of time, so you will need to really practice to get everything you want said in those 5 minutes.