---
layout: default
title: Essay 12
---

## Book X, Ch.6--9

Aristotle's concludes the *Nicomachean Ethics* by identifying that activity (or activities) that constitute happiness, that activity (or activities) that we should engage in to live a full and flourishing life. However, Aristotle seems to have different answers as to which activity (or activities) do count as the one that make for a happy life. 

In this paper, identify these opposing answers, explain why there seems to be a tension between them, and then identify one way that Aristotle might argue that these answers are not, in fact, in tension.  

## Essay Overview

+ These essays serve to cement what you have learned in the previous week through the readings and class discussions. You will waste time by researching online or searching for secondary sources. The primary text in addition to the guidebook is ample material for these essays.

+ They are short. Write at least 250 words Do not write more than 500 words. 500 words is equivalent to 2 pages if you use Times New Roman, 12 point font, double spacing, and one inch margins. I have no preference for how you format your papers. The word count matters. Your name, titles, dates, etc., are not part of the word count. 

+ 12 of these essays will be assigned. You must complete 8. If you complete more than 8, the lowest grades will be dropped.

+ Submit these essays through Blackboard in the 'essays' folder. 

+ Essays are due Monday by 3:00pm. 





 